
Transcriber’s Note


This picture book has no Table of Contents.




[Illustration: (cover)

  THE NEW BOOK OF
  NIAGARA

_Scenes in Summer and Winter_]




[Illustration:

  THE NEW BOOK OF
  NIAGARA

  _Scenes in Summer and Winter_]

                                   ❦

  “_Niagara is an awful symbol of Infinite power--a version of Infinite
  beauty--a shrine, a temple erected by the hand of the Almighty for all
  the children of men._”--_Oration by Jas. C. Carter._

                                   ❦

  BUFFALO, N. Y.
  ROBERT ALLAN REID, PUBLISHER,
  253–257 ELLICOTT STREET.

  Copyrighted, 1901, by Robert Allan Reid. All rights reserved.




[Illustration: GENERAL VIEW OF THE FALLS.

Favorite positions for this view are Hennepin View in Prospect Park and
the New Steel Bridge. At the left is the American Fall with Luna Island
and Goat Island dividing it from the Horseshoe Fall. The Maid of the
Mist, near her landing, and the inclined railway are minor objects of
interest.]


[Illustration: CANADIAN FALL, AND MAID OF THE MIST.

A trip on the “Maid of the Mist” past the Falls is one of the most
fascinating of the experiences to be had at Niagara. The views of the
descending floods, the swirling water below and the rainbow through the
mist all lend enchantment to the trip.]


[Illustration: AMERICAN FALL FROM PROSPECT POINT.

It is while standing at or near Prospect Point that the very large
majority of people who visit Niagara get their first view of the
wondrous cataract. At one wide sweep of vision Niagara is before you
and you see the water pour over the edge of the precipice, falling with
stupendous power on the rocks below.]


[Illustration: AMERICAN FALL FROM BELOW.

Standing on the rocks at the foot of the Inclined Railway in Prospect
Park and looking at the down-pour of water over the American Fall, a
new impression of Niagara’s greatness comes over you, and you marvel at
the beauty of the mighty flood.]


[Illustration: THE FALLS BY MOONLIGHT.

Under the light of the full moon of summer time, when Nature has done
her best to make the locality all about delightful, the mind is made
receptive of the moonlight softness, and the beauty of the scene
impresses all with its magnificence.]


[Illustration: PROSPECT POINT IN WINTER.

In winter and summer alike Prospect Point is one of the main vantage
spots from which to view Niagara. Immediately below the Point the
mountain grows to an unlimited size as the spray freezes, and builds it
by night and by day. In the ice bridge season there is no better place
to view it than Prospect Point.]


[Illustration: TERRAPIN ROCK AND HORSESHOE FALL FROM GOAT ISLAND.

The Horseshoe or Canadian Fall, as a single object, is regarded as
the sublimest thing in Nature. The Canadian Rapids have a fall of 55
feet in three-quarters of a mile before reaching the Falls, while it
is estimated that the volume of water is ten times greater than that
passing over the American Fall.]


[Illustration: HORSESHOE FALL FROM BELOW.

The height of the Horseshoe Fall is 165 feet and the stupendous nature
of the Fall is more impressive when the visitor stands at the water’s
edge in the gorge and looks upward at the flood descending in such
graceful lines.]


[Illustration: TERRAPIN POINT IN WINTER.

The scene at Terrapin Point in winter is one of brilliancy and
splendor. The spray-cloud of the Horseshoe Fall is wafted to the
shores of Goat Island where King Winter’s breadth congeals it all to
a marble-like formation, and the snowy whiteness of the spectacle is
dazzling in the bright sunlight.]


[Illustration: ICE MOUNTAIN AND ICE BRIDGE.

The beauty of this scene varies yearly, for the wind and weather have
all to do with the magnitude of the formations. When the weather is
exceedingly cold the ice mountain, between the American Fall and the
Inclined Railway, attains a magnificent height. The ice also forms from
shore to shore, enabling people to pass at will to the Canadian side,
and forming what is popularly called the ice bridge.]


[Illustration: OBSERVATION TOWER VIEW OF GOAT ISLAND AND RAPIDS.

This view shows “the dividing of the waters” of Niagara River, and in
the immediate front the American Rapids are seen flowing tumultuously
onward towards the towering cataract. Far across beyond Goat Island are
the Canadian Rapids. The greater grandeurs and immense boundaries of
which are best seen from Victoria Park on the Canadian side.]


[Illustration: BRINK OF THE AMERICAN FALL.

Probably there is no one sight which impresses itself more strongly
upon the great majority of beholders than this view of the brink of
the American Fall. Such mighty on-rushing torrents, so powerful, yet
so smoothly and alluringly moving on over the precipice, and so near
is the visitor to what seems an abyss of destruction that the scene is
never forgotten.]


[Illustration: THE AMERICAN FALL FROM GOAT ISLAND.

This view across American Fall is one never to be forgotten. Here the
brink of the Fall is seen in all its beauty, while far across the Fall,
Prospect Park, with its constant crowds, forms part of the picture. A
fine view of the Upper Steel Bridge is also here enjoyed.]


[Illustration: HORSESHOE FALL BY SEARCHLIGHT.

This photographic masterpiece, the crest of the Horseshoe Fall by
searchlight, taken from Falls View, is the only one of its kind ever
made. “The scene is entrancing as the searchlight kisses the water into
new beauty.”

ON THE BRIDGE AT MIDNIGHT. This is a night scene, the Upper Steel
Bridge, made possible by the recent advancement in photography.]


[Illustration: WHIRLPOOL RAPIDS.

The Whirlpool Rapids begin within sight of the Falls. The gorge narrows
to 300 feet and the current rushes onward at a speed of 40 miles an
hour and the foam-crested waters are entrancingly beautiful.]


[Illustration: THE WHIRLPOOL.

The Whirlpool is about two miles below the Falls and is the greatest
known river pocket. Into it the Rapids plunge in all their fury, and a
gyrating motion is given the entire body of water. Here the river turns
at right angles, causing one of the most mysterious and fascinating
features of this mighty stream of water.]


[Illustration:

  INCLINED RAILWAY.
  AMERICAN FALL.
  LUNA ISLAND.
  CAVE OF THE WINDS.
  GOAT ISLAND.
  HORSESHOE FALL.
  TABLE ROCK.
  VICTORIA PARK.

PANORAMIC VIEW OF NIAGARA FALLS FROM THE CANADIAN SIDE.]


[Illustration: THE CANADIAN RAPIDS AND HORSESHOE FALL, FROM FALLS VIEW
STATION.

This is one of the grand views to be had from the Canadian side of
the river. The rapids, by their great descent and vastness, convey
an impressive effect to the mind, and, together with the Falls and
scenery of Victoria Park, combines to make one of the most pleasing
pictures about Niagara. The entire length of the park is traversed by
the electric cars, which are so great a convenience about Niagara, for
tourists.]


[Illustration: AMERICAN FALL FROM CANADIAN SIDE.

Standing in Victoria Park, one gets a full front view of the American
Fall, while at the right of the scene is Center Fall, flowing between
Luna and Goat Islands. The American Fall has a width of 1,000 feet, a
height of 158 feet, while the Rapids above descend forty feet in a half
mile. All visitors should go to the Canadian side for the Canadian Fall
and Rapids, the most imposing features of the Falls, are there best
seen with their wonderful rainbow and mist effects, while the beauties
of Victoria Park itself well repay a visit.]


[Illustration: THE GORGE.

The life work of Niagara River has been and continues to be the digging
of the Niagara Gorge through which it flows. Those who have studied the
subject thoroughly have reached the conclusion that the great trench
was excavated by the running of the river itself. In its length, the
gorge is in one sense a measure of the age of the river.]


[Illustration: SCENE ON THE “GORGE ROUTE.”

This Electric road runs along the New York Shore, for much of the way,
about twenty feet up from the water, and affords unequaled views of the
Whirlpool Rapids, the great bridge and cliffs, the Whirlpool and all
scenic features. The objects of interest along the Gorge Route are only
second to the two great cataracts themselves.]


[Illustration: HORSESHOE OR CANADIAN FALL IN WINTER.

The intensity of the mighty grasp of winter is at no point better
portrayed than in its effects on the Horseshoe Fall. Gradually the
waters are chilled and frozen until where yesterday the river plunged
over the precipice in gleeful, laughing manner, huge stalactites of ice
are hung reaching from the cliff-top to the slope below.]


[Illustration: ICE FORMATION AT CAVE OF THE WINDS.

In February, 1896, for a period of four days, the Cave of the Winds
was dry, the water of the Fall being kept back by the ice formation.
Visitors sought the cavern and roamed about admiring the icy scenes on
every side. The photograph for the picture above was then made, and it
may never be possible to obtain the same again.]


[Illustration: UPPER STEEL ARCH BRIDGE.

This wonderful example of man’s handiwork connects the extreme lower
points of Prospect Park on the American side, with Victoria Park on the
Canadian side. It has a single deck, is 1,268 feet long, 49 feet wide
and 190 feet above the water, and was built in 1898. Splendid views are
had from this bridge.]


[Illustration: THE ICE PALACE.

The Ice Palace, a thing of beauty in the production of which man
essayed to supplement Nature, was erected in the State Reservation in
the winter of 1898. “An area of 120 by 160 feet was covered by its
gleaming walls of crystal. The entire structure was gay with bunting
and flags by day and brilliant with electrical illumination by night.”]


[Illustration: BRIDGES AT NIAGARA.

  LUNA ISLAND BRIDGE.                  BRIDGE TO THIRD SISTER ISLAND.

  BRIDGE TO SECOND SISTER ISLAND.      RUSTIC BRIDGE TO WILLOW ISLAND.]


[Illustration: LOWER STEEL ARCH BRIDGE.

This bridge spans the river at its narrowest part. It was built in 1897
by the Grand Trunk Railroad Company. It has two decks, the upper for
railway trains and the lower for carriages and pedestrians. The arch
has a span of 550 feet.]


[Illustration: TABLE ROCK AND THE DEVIL’S PULPIT.

This rocky plateau is located over the Devil’s Hole, on the American
side, 300 feet above the wild waters of the Gorge. It has been
the scene of many recorded and traditional battles and sanguinary
struggles. Grand sweeps of scenery are to be witnessed from this
commanding site.]


[Illustration: DEVIL’S HOLE.

The Devil’s Hole is a dark and gloomy chasm in the high bank, and has a
depth of 150 feet. It is said to have been a store house for ammunition
in early times. It is reached by the City trolley line and by the Gorge
Road.]


[Illustration: BROCK’S MONUMENT

Stands on Queenston Heights, about four miles below the Whirlpool. It
was erected to commemorate the memory of Sir Isaac Brock who fell in
battle in the war of 1812. It is a noble shaft, 100 feet high, capped
with a statue of Brock. It is seen for many miles in all directions.]


[Illustration: SUSPENSION BRIDGE AT LEWISTON.

This Suspension Bridge is now the only one which spans Niagara River.
It links Queenston on the Canadian side with Lewiston on the American
side, seven miles below the Falls, and is crossed by the Belt Line
trolley route about the Gorge. The suspended span is 800 feet, and it
has a cable span of 1040 feet.]


[Illustration: A FAMILIAR WINTER SCENE IN PROSPECT PARK.

In winter the high winds which prevail, sometimes for days at a time,
catch the spray from the American Fall and carry it far back into the
forest growth, the trees become ice-laden, and the transformation that
takes place is beautiful in the extreme.]


[Illustration:

  THE RED MAN’S FACT      THE WHITE MAN’S FANCY

FROM THE FAMOUS PAINTINGS BY JAMES FRANCIS BROWN.

To the Indians the thundering of the water was the voice of the Great
Spirit; the spray-cloud his habitation. A portion of the crops and
spoils of the chase were annually offered as tokens, and the fairest
maiden of a tribe was sacrificed by being sent over the falls in a
canoe laden with fruits and flowers.

No less than the Red Man, is his successor, the White Man, impressed
with the majesty of the Creator’s power as displayed in the grandeurs
of Niagara. “Between falling flood and rising cloud, you imagine a
mystical meaning in the passage of body to soul, of matter to spirit,
of human to divine.”]


[Illustration: ROCK OF AGES, AT CAVE OF THE WINDS.

Surrounded with an atmosphere of sentiment is this view at Niagara. It
forms an artistic and pleasing picture. Evidently at some remote time
in the past the rock has fallen from the cliff above. The famous cave
of the winds lies back of the Center Fall. It is 100 feet high, 100
feet wide and 60 feet deep.]

